# OCaml Programming: Correct + Efficient + Beautiful

A textbook on functional programming and data structures in OCaml, with an
emphasis on semantics and software engineering. This book is the textbook for CS
3110 Data Structures and Functional Programming at Cornell University. A past
title of this book was "Functional Programming in OCaml".

**THIS EDITION IS IN PROGRESS AND INCOMPLETE.** If you have stumbled across this
during Summer 2021, please know that I'm in the middle of converting from an
[old version][old] that used Gitbook to this new version based on Jupyter Book.
I'm porting each chapter in order, so it will become more complete as the summer
goes on.

[old]: https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs3110/2021sp/textbook/

<!--
**Fall 2021 Edition.** For the most recent version of this work, see the most
recent [CS 3110 course website](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs3110).
-->

**Authors.** This book is based on courses taught by Michael R. Clarkson, Robert
L. Constable, Nate Foster, Michael D. George, Dan Grossman, Daniel P.
Huttenlocher, Dexter Kozen, Greg Morrisett, Andrew C. Myers, Radu Rugina, and
Ramin Zabih. Together they have created over 20 years worth of course notes and
intellectual contributions. Teasing out who contributed what is, by now, not an
easy task. The primary compiler and author of this work in its form as a unified
textbook is Michael R. Clarkson, who as of this edition is the author of about
40% of the words and code tokens.

**Copyright 2021 Michael R. Clarkson.** Released under the <a rel="license"
href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/">
<img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0"
src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/4.0/80x15.png" /></a>